[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>EDWARD GROUP: Welcome
back to "Healing Matrix."
With us again is
Dr. Blanche Grube.
We're going to pick
up where we left off
in the last episode discussing
the extreme toxicity
of mercury, which despite
irrefutable scientific evidence
is still being used today.
To start, let's take a look
at just what mercury poisoning
can do to the body.
And remember, it only
takes a tiny amount
of mercury, about
as much as what
can fit on the tip
of this pencil,
to wreak havoc on
your entire system.
What are some of the symptoms
that you've experienced?
>>BLANCHE GRUBE: Well,
for me it was primarily
brain fog, and then cancer.
I guess I was fortunate
enough to skip
the chronic fatigue that
most patients get in between.
And it's different-- it's
different for everybody.
It all depends on what
your weak genetic link is.
If your weak genetic link
is to have chronic fatigue,
then that's where
it's going to go.
>>EDWARD: I mean,
autoimmune diseases,
it affects the gut-- there's
so many different things
that mercury toxicity affects.
>>GRUBE: Yeah.
>>EDWARD: What
about infertility?
I've heard that mercury
is affecting people's--
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: --ability to conceive.
>>GRUBE: Well,
remember we were having
a discussion about mercury
attacking all of the protein
molecules in our body?
And all of our hormones--
our hormones are proteins.
So if you're-- the hormones that
you're producing to make you
ovulate, to be able to carry
a pregnancy to term are being
messed up by mercury, then
you're not going to be able
to carry a pregnancy to term.
So we're seeing more and
more young couples just not
being able to conceive.
>>EDWARD: Autoimmune diseases
seems like it's more and more.
It's almost like a
pandemic or something.
What's going on with
mercury and autoimmune?
>>GRUBE: Well, mercury causes
the body to attack itself.
When mercury attacks a
cell, the body no longer
recognizes that
cell as being you.
That really is the function
of the immune system.
Those white blood
cells float around
in the bloodstream
all day long just
looking-- self,
non-self, self, non-self.
And the moment they see a cell,
even if it's part of you--
it's one of your muscle cells,
it's one of your nerve cells--
but it has mercury
attached to it,
the body recognizes
it as non-self
and begins to attack it.
So we have a lot of
patients that have diabetes.
Diabetes is defined as
an autoimmune disease.
We have patients with MS,
another autoimmune disease.
Rheumatoid arthritis.
The list is endless.
It really is.
>>EDWARD: Why do you think some
people get symptoms and some
people don't?
>>GRUBE: That's the
million dollar question.
Why is it that some
people can smoke and don't
get lung cancer?
Why is it that some people
can drink every night
and not become alcoholic and not
develop cirrhosis of the liver?
Well, because we're
all individual.
>>EDWARD: Yeah.
>>GRUBE: And we all have
different weak genetic links.
>>EDWARD: Some people just have
a stronger affinity for things.
But I do think that it
still causes some damage
over a long period of time.
>>GRUBE: Oh, absolutely.
That's irrefutable.
>>EDWARD: There's just
no way that it could not.
It's a toxin to the body.
>>GRUBE: Exactly.
>>EDWARD: So we have one
of Dr. Blanche's patients
who suffered greatly
from mercury poisoning
joining us today on Skype.
Here's David Staley
and his wife Patty.
Hi, David.
Hi, Patty.
Thank you for joining us today.
>>DAVID STALEY: Hello.
>>PATTY STALEY: Hi, doctors.
>>GRUBE: Hi.
>>PATTY: Good to see you both.
>>EDWARD: So David,
tell us, when
did you first get silver
fillings, or amalgams?
>>DAVID: Oh, boy.
Young age.
>>PATTY: When you
were in grade school.
>>DAVID: Yeah, grade school.
I went to the dentist
regularly, and probably
had fillings put
in consistently.
When I say consistently, almost
every trip to the dentist
it seemed I was getting
drilled and filled.
So I've had quite a few--
quite a few through the years.
>>EDWARD: When did you actually
start noticing health changes
for the negative?
>>DAVID: I would say,
probably, it was late 30s--
39, 40, something like that--
where I began with the
neurological symptoms.
Leading up to that, I
would get sinus infections.
>>PATTY: Serious
sinus infections.
>>DAVID: Serious
Had workups done,
and nothing really
pointed to the reason why.
But when I started with
the neurological symptoms--
and the correlation there was,
I was going to the dentist
regularly, not realizing
the connection at the time,
but had--
just was, every six
months, getting cleanings.
And I guess, probably, I had
good insurance at the time.
So I was utilizing that.
And as that was
proceeding-- and again,
not making the connection--
I started having vague symptoms.
Insomnia was
starting to creep in.
That was probably one
of the beginning signs.
>>PATTY: Numbness and tingling.
>>DAVID: Yeah,
numbness, tingling,
left side of my body--
mostly on the left side.
And in hindsight, and looking
at the dental work that
was being done, a lot of it
was on the left side of my--
in my mouth.
But it progressed
from the insomnia to--
oh, man, memory loss, anxiety.
>>PATTY: I thought, you know,
we should go get a checkup.
And he did.
And he started-- at that
point, he just started building
from not having a chart at
the doctor's office to slowly,
incrementally, his
chart just began
to grow and grow and
grow until it was
this thick inside of one year.
And still, the doctor
had no answers for him.
And then one day he went
in-- we were just getting
ready to go on vacation.
And he went in to see him
one last time, totally
and completely exhausted.
Flopped on the office
couch, and Anna came out
and she said to him, come in.
And what's wrong?
And, well, it's the same
thing that's been wrong
for the last nine months.
So in he goes.
And then the doctor came in.
And--
>>DAVID: Now, keep in mind, all
the blood work that was done--
blood work, it all
came back fine.
And he would look at it and
just kind of shake his head.
And eventually--
>>PATTY: That day.
>>DAVID: That day,
pretty much told me--
called me into his
office, closed the door,
and said, listen, I think
you need to go see somebody.
And I said, see somebody?
I said, what do you mean?
And I looked at him and
I went, you telling me
I need to see a psychiatrist?
And that's--
[LAUGHTER]
And he shook his head.
And I went, no.
I said, OK, that's it.
I just told him, I said,
you're not finding my problem.
And I left.
It was very frustrating.
So at that point, we started--
>>PATTY: Looking
outside the box.
>>DAVID: Yeah, looking
outside of the box.
I think the tipping point
to calling a doctor--
again, I was born and
raised in this area--
was driving.
And I pulled up to a stop sign.
And again, I knew where I was.
But I just blanked out.
And I went-- I didn't know if
I should turn left or right.
And that really scared me.
I thought, oh my god,
I'm losing my mind now.
I can't even think straight.
So I made the phone call,
and I went to see a doctor.
>>EDWARD: And that was
Dr. Von Kiel, correct?
>>DAVID: Yes, yes.
It was Dr. Von Kiel.
And he started-- he
asked me questions.
And at one point he said, can
I take a look in your mouth?
And of course I said,
OK, wondering why.
And he got a tongue depressor
and was looking in my mouth.
And he said, boy, you have
a lot of metal in there.
I said, yeah.
I said, I've had
it for a long time.
So it turned out that when
the test results came back,
I had probably--
I think he said
I had the highest
level of mercury and nickel
that he's seen in a patient.
>>GRUBE: Wow.
>>PATTY: Yes.
>>DAVID: And at that point
he explained some things.
I mean, obviously, I would
have to get the fillings out.
And he gave me a list
of several dentists
and said he had no financial
interest in this whatsoever.
And but he said that
the patients that he
sent to Dr. Blanche got well.
I said, OK.
So at that point--
he did, by the way, explain
to me about the vitamin C IVs.
And so I went to him regularly.
Probably was doing two or
three vitamin C IVs a week
until I got to see Dr. Blanche.
And made it to see her.
And I think it was, what, over
a period of about a month she
took all the fillings
out, quadrant at a time.
And slowly, the symptoms
started resolving.
>>GRUBE: Amazing.
>>EDWARD: What a story.
I mean, since you
were a little kid,
having all that metal in your
mouth, and didn't even know.
And I think that's
happening a lot today.
So many people are going
to the doctor's office,
and they're being diagnosed with
all these different conditions.
They're being put on all
these pharmaceuticals.
And the doctors are not
looking in their mouth.
Dr. Blanche, what were
your thoughts when you
met David for the first time?
>>GRUBE: Well, having had
so much experience listening
to Hal Huggins, as
soon as he walked
into the office I just said, oh,
one more mercury toxic patient.
Absolutely.
I knew that was what
his problem was.
In those days, we didn't
have conscious sedation.
So Dave had his
fillings removed what
I call the old fashioned
way, one section at a time.
And of course, we made
sure that we took out
the section that had the
highest negative charge first.
That's always a must,
even to this day.
You always have to take out
the filling with the highest
negative charge,
because then that
allows the body to realize, oh,
yes, a change has taken place.
And that's why he started
feeling better right away.
>>EDWARD: So if he had the
highest level of mercury
that you've ever seen,
what about detox?
You had to be pretty
careful about detoxifying--
>>GRUBE: Absolutely.
>>EDWARD: --his system, right?
>>GRUBE: And there's no one
way to detoxify everybody.
Every patient is different.
I get that question
all the time.
People say, what's the
best way to detoxify?
There is no best
way to detoxify.
Some people do
better in a sauna.
better with cilantro.
Some people do
better with charcoal.
Everybody is different.
So we don't have
one detox protocol
for all of our patients.
>>EDWARD: So David,
how long did it
take before you really
started feeling better
with the insomnia, with
the fatigue once you
had the amalgams removed?
>>DAVID: Fairly quick.
It wasn't overnight.
But the improvements were--
I was noticing improvements
probably first couple weeks
with the sleeping.
I just have to
say, I used to say
that this was a
living hell for me,
to go through what I
went through until--
because you want to--
you can fight something when you
know what it is, or who it is,
or what it is.
I didn't know.
It wasn't until I found out
that I had, OK, let's go.
And then the-- you
start searching out
what you need to do.
And Dr. Blanche
and Dr. Von Kiel--
those two people saved my
life, the way I look at it.
I feel that if those
fillings were not removed
I probably would end up with
MS, and I'd be in a wheelchair.
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>PATTY: Or worse.
>>DAVID: Or worse.
>>EDWARD: How are you
feeling today, David?
>>DAVID: Well, I have to
tell you, I have some--
maybe some lingering
neurological.
But for-- my energy abounds.
I have no problem sleeping.
For my age, sometimes-- some
of the fellows that work for me
are 20 years younger.
And I can run
circles around them.
I mean, I just--
so-- and I know this would
not have happened had I not
had these fillings out.
I just--
>>PATTY: No.
No.
That's not the road that we
were heading down back then.
No.
>>EDWARD: Yeah.
Thank you.
We're so glad that
you're feeling better.
Thank you so much for sharing.
Dr. Blanche, do
you have anything
you'd like to comment on
regarding David's story--
>>GRUBE: No.
I just want to say thank you.
>>EDWARD: --and Patty.
>>DAVID: Oh, thank you.
>>GRUBE: And I
appreciate both of them--
>>PATTY: Thank you.
>>GRUBE: --very much.
Yeah.
>>DAVID: Just thank you.
>>EDWARD: Yeah.
Thanks for coming on today.
>>GRUBE: Yeah.
Thank you.
>>PATTY: Thank you for
what you both are doing.
>>DAVID: Yes.
>>GRUBE: Thank you.
Trying to get the word out.
>>EDWARD: So if
somebody is actually
watching this right
now and they're saying,
hey, I might have
these symptoms,
what would you tell them
to do at this moment?
>>GRUBE: Well, unfortunately,
it is a matter of finances.
Ideally, they should find
a good biological dentist,
one that is board certified--
IABDM is my favorite
organization--
so you know that they
know what they're doing.
Find a good biological dentist.
Get the fillings done safely.
Get them taken out.
I know that there are a lot of
people that are going to say,
I just can't afford that.
Well, if you can't
afford that, at least
stop putting more
mercury into your body.
>>EDWARD: Wait, are you telling
me that dental insurance does
not cover--
>>GRUBE: No.
>>EDWARD: --mercury
amalgam removal?
>>GRUBE: No, I'm sorry.
I hate to burst your bubble.
But no, dental
insurance does not
cover mercury amalgam
removal for the sake
of removing a mercury--
toxic product from your tooth.
Now, if the tooth
has to be replaced
because it's not serviceable,
that's a different story.
Then they will pay
for part of that.
You notice I said part of that.
So for those of you
who can't afford
to have the full dental
revision, because it usually
does cost a few
thousand dollars--
if you can't afford to
do that, for God's sake,
please stop eating fish.
Stop chewing gum,
because when you
chew gum you heat up the
surface of the teeth,
and you're giving
yourself more mercury.
After you eat a meal, the
level of mercury rises.
And then, as the
meal gets digested,
the level of mercury
being released slows down.
And then comes the next meal,
and the level of mercury
rises again.
But if you're going to be
chewing gum in between meals,
you're keeping that
level of mercury
being released from the
teeth high at all times.
So number one, stop eating fish.
Number two, stop chewing gum.
Number three, take care of
your mouth as best you can.
And that means
flossing, irrigating
with sodium ascorbate,
keeping your gums as healthy
as you possibly can.
If you have gum disease and
you have mercury fillings,
you're never going to have
complete resolution of your gum
disease so long as the
mercury is still there.
But that doesn't mean you
just throw in the towel
and not do anything.
You still try to keep your
mouth as healthy and as clean
as possible.
And then start your own fund.
Put in a certain
amount of money,
whatever you can afford,
towards your dental revision,
because you don't know how
long you're going to live.
And you don't know how
many more years you have
before you begin
to get symptoms.
As Dave and Patty
were telling us,
it took quite a few years before
he really started getting sick.
He didn't drop sick right
out of the dental office
when he was a kid.
Same with me.
Nobody made that
connection because it
doesn't happen right away.
So if you're not sick, if
you don't have symptoms,
now is the time
to start saving up
for your full dental revision.
And then make sure that
it's done properly,
that you have a biocompatibility
test done beforehand,
that you have IV vitamin C,
that you have a dentist that
knows to put on a rubber
dam, to put suction,
to have lots of water.
And then, of course, we
all have a responsibility
to protect the environment.
So ask the dentists, do they
have an amalgam separator
to separate the water before it
hits our streams and our sewer
systems?
So these are all
things that a person
can do if they can't afford to
have the full dental revision.
>>EDWARD: Yeah.
I'd just like to clarify, if
somebody is watching this show
and they say, I think I'm
being poisoned by mercury,
if they go to their
general practitioner,
medical doctor,
is their medical
doctor going to be
able to test them for mercury?
Or is this--
>>GRUBE: Yes.
>>EDWARD: --something that
they should go straight
to a biological dentist?
>>GRUBE: No, their medical
doctor can do tests.
They can do urine tests.
They can do a hair analysis.
They can see where they're at.
But other than that, they're
going to need the dentist.
Eventually you need to
sit in that dental chair.
It's not something
that you can do.
A medical doctor, or a
chiropractor, or a naturopath
can give recommendations
about things
to keep their bowels
clean and to help detox
some of the mercury while
they're still having
the mercury in their mouth.
They can do all kinds
of things like that.
But eventually they will still
have to sit in the dental chair
and have the full
dental revision done.
>>EDWARD: Why does the ADA only
list mercury as an allergy?
>>GRUBE: I have no idea.
[LAUGHTER]
It is not an allergy.
There's no such thing as an--
I mean, some people are
also allergic to mercury.
But it's toxic for everybody.
The same with nickel.
They say that there
are some people who
are allergic to nickel.
That is true.
But nickel is also a
carcinogenic for everybody.
>>EDWARD: I just don't get it.
There's so many
scientific studies
that prove that mercury
is one of the most
toxic elements in mankind.
Yet it's still allowed to
be put in people's mouths.
>>GRUBE: I don't get it.
I really don't get it.
And every time the
American Dental Association
says that there's
plenty of studies
to prove that it's safe--
I've never seen one single study
produced by them, not a one.
>>EDWARD: So how does that
make you feel when you talk
to these conventional dentists?
I mean, do you hold
them responsible for not
educating themselves on
the dangers of mercury?
>>GRUBE: No, I hold the
schools responsible,
because the schools don't
want to rock the boat.
They don't want to change
their funding in any way.
So everybody is
always-- everybody's
always looking at
the-- their pocketbook
first and their pockets
first before they
make a decision as to what
they should really be doing.
>>EDWARD: Why aren't the
schools teaching this?
Biological dentistry.
>>GRUBE: They're getting funded.
They're getting funded by the
companies that make amalgam.
>>EDWARD: Mm-hmm.
>>GRUBE: So they're not
about to teach the opposite.
>>EDWARD: So Dr.
Blanche, let's talk
about removing silver fillings.
When did dentistry, or
biological dentistry,
start actually removing
these silver fillings,
or mercury-based fillings?
>>GRUBE: Well, that began
with Dr. Hal Huggins.
Dr. Hal Huggins is the one who
decided how would it be best
to remove the mercury fillings
without the patient getting
more mercury.
And so he was one of the first
to say you must use a rubber
dam.
>>EDWARD: So he actually
invented the rubber dam,
because he--
>>GRUBE: He didn't
invent the rubber dam.
The rubber dam was actually
used in dentistry for root canal
treatments so that when you were
filing the inside of a tooth
and you accidentally
drop the file,
you wouldn't drop the file
down the patient's throat.
So in dental school,
we were taught,
you must use a rubber dam
when you do a root canal.
And I graduated from
dental school in 1982.
100% of my classmates
said, I am never
going to use a rubber dam again
unless I'm doing a root canal.
>>EDWARD: And so all of
those vapors, probably--
>>GRUBE: That's right.
>>EDWARD: --chunks of
mercury, everything else,
the patient swallowed.
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: Wow.
>>GRUBE: And in those days,
almost every dental office
had a spittoon, a
little porcelain sink.
And when the dentist was
filling-- finished drilling,
they would say, take
some water and spit.
And you would spit
into the sink.
And you would hear
clink, clink, clink,
clink-- all these little
pieces of mercury amalgam.
And how many times did
you also take some water
and accidentally
swallow a little bit
and get some more of it
going into your intestines?
>>EDWARD: Is that
still going on today?
>>GRUBE: That is still going
on today, I'm sorry to say.
>>EDWARD: Mm.
>>GRUBE: And it has got to stop.
>>EDWARD: Well, we have
some shocking video for you
of just what can happen when
a mercury filling is removed.
>>MATTHEW YOUNG: We're trying
to visualize here and prove
the fact that there's a
significant amount that
comes off during the
mixing, during the packing.
And then we have some
teeth with the amalgam
that's been set for a while.
And we're going to
be removing that
with a high-speed
dental drill in order
to visualize how much vapor
comes off during that procedure
as well.
>>BOYD HALEY: The American
Dental Association
has made the
argument that mercury
is fixed in amalgam fillings,
and it doesn't come out easily.
And what this research that
we're doing here visually shows
is that when you drill
on an amalgam filling,
that it dramatically exposes
the patient, and the dentist,
and the dental technician, to
huge amounts of mercury vapor
that enters the body.
It's even worse than
what they imagined.
>>ALEX HUMMEL: 2,483
micrograms per cubic meter.
And I've never seen levels
of mercury this high.
That's pretty much unheard of
in any type of work environment.
>>HALEY: Because it definitely
shows with just absolute fact,
hard science, that
amalgams, when
they are heated with the
drill, by drilling on them,
release copious amounts of
mercury vapor into the air.
>>EDWARD: That is
just shocking to see.
>>GRUBE: Mm-hmm.
>>EDWARD: They should play that
video in every dentist's office
before--
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: --someone goes in
and gets a cavity filled.
>>GRUBE: Then all the
patients would go running out.
>>EDWARD: Well, yeah.
That probably would
be a good thing.
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: Hopefully, they'd find
a biological dentist somewhere.
[LAUGHTER]
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: So what exactly is
involved in a safe mercury
amalgam removal?
>>GRUBE: Well, number
one, the patient
has to be prepared
with supplementation.
And the patient has to be able
to have a good bowel movement.
I know you probably
didn't expect a dentist
to start talking about
bowel movements right now.
But when you detoxify mercury--
and that's what happens right
after a mercury revision.
When you detoxify mercury,
80% of the mercury
goes through the bowel.
And so if a patient
is constipated,
that's not a good patient
to do a dental revision on.
So we like to make sure that our
patients are never constipated,
that things are flowing very
nicely, that they're taking
minerals, that
they're on a good diet
before they ever sit
in the dental chair.
Then, once they get
in the dental chair,
we have IV vitamin C
flowing through their arms.
>>EDWARD: So are you saying that
before they even come in for--
>>GRUBE: Before they--
>>EDWARD: --amalgam removal--
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: --you have them on a
one-week or a two-week program
to clean their diet up, make
sure they're not constipated--
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: --get their body
prepared for the procedure.
>>GRUBE: Correct.
Correct.
And then once they
come in we do--
we have IV vitamin C
flowing in their bloodstream
just prior to actually
getting started.
That's the first thing we do.
Now we've got our
biocompatibility list.
We know exactly what dental
materials we can put in.
We've sometimes have to purchase
those dental materials to make
sure we have them on board.
Then the patient is sedated.
Then the patient
receives anesthetic.
And in our office, we
don't use any anesthetic
that has epinephrine in it.
And we'll discuss that
in another interview.
The patient gets an anesthetic.
And then we place a rubber
dam over the section
that we're going
to be working on.
So the only thing
that is showing
are the teeth that
need to have work done.
There's suction on the other
side of the rubber dam,
on the inside of
the patient's mouth.
There's suction on our
side of the rubber dam.
The rubber dam itself is smeared
with a sulfur-based cream.
Let me tell you the story
about how that came about.
>>EDWARD: Well, we actually have
some photos in your office--
>>GRUBE: Oh, very good.
>>EDWARD: --if
that's going to help.
And you can talk us
through some of those.
>>GRUBE: Right.
And as you can see, the dentist
has a hat covering her head.
She's got a gas mask on.
She's got her eyes covered.
We're fully draped.
And we've got gloves on.
And as the mercury fillings
are being drilled on,
the dental assistant is spraying
water on top of all of it
so that most of it goes
up into the suction hose.
That's the safest way
to remove amalgam.
As you can see, right
in front of the patient
is something that looks
like a white elephant nose.
We actually call that
Mr. Snuffleupagus.
[LAUGHTER]
And Mr. Snuffleupagus is a very
high-powered vacuum cleaner
with a filter in it so
that it sucks the air
and keeps a positive
airflow away from us.
Behind the patient's
head is a machine
called a mercury vapor ionizer.
This little machine spits
out 600,000 electrons
per second that flow in an
arch over our working space
and get hooked onto a
receiver at the other end.
Well, everything that
is positively charged
is bad for us.
The mercury particles that
go floating in the air
are positively charged.
Bacteria that may come out
of the patient's mouth--
positively charged.
Viruses-- positively charged.
I could go on and on and on.
>>EDWARD: Mm-hmm.
>>GRUBE: That
mercury vapor ionizer
zaps all those positively
charged particles and gets them
away from us.
So as you can see, the
patient is fully draped.
Their head is covered.
Their whole body is covered.
They've got the rubber dam on.
And then on top
of that, we've got
another piece of plastic covered
paper to cover that completely.
So the only part of
them that is exposed
are the teeth that
we're working on.
Then we've got the
ionizer behind them.
We've got suction in the
front, suction in the back.
We've got IV vitamin C flowing
through their bloodstream.
This is a big deal.
We do everything
we can possibly do
to keep the patient from getting
one more molecule of mercury.
>>EDWARD: So take us
through the actual process.
A patient comes to
your office, says,
I'm here to get my
amalgams removed.
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: What's the first
thing that you guys do?
I'm assuming a good
history with the patient.
>>GRUBE: Well, before they would
ever even walk into our office,
they're calling us on the phone.
>>EDWARD: Oh.
>>GRUBE: And so that
initial phone call
can be anywhere from
an hour to two hours,
because the patients need
to tell us their story.
And then we send the patient
an information packet,
which includes a prescription
for a blood test,
a prescription
for hair analysis,
a questionnaire because I want
to know their whole history
from the time they were little.
Many patients, as they're
filling out that questionnaire,
they have that aha moment.
They go, wait a minute.
That's right.
I started having the allergies
after that fifth filling
was put in.
Or-- you know, they
have an aha moment.
They understand.
So just filling out
that questionnaire
and putting all the dates
and what your symptoms were
is a very educational tool
for the patients themselves.
So they fill all of that out.
And we send them the kit for
the biocompatibility test also.
So even before they
come to our office
they've already
done a lot of work.
They've already had blood
drawn from their arm.
They've had somebody-- hopefully
somebody merciful would cut
a little bit of hair off
the back of their neck,
the little--
about three inches.
And they've already had the
questionnaire filled out.
They now have their
biocompatibility test done.
So now they know
what dental materials
they can put in their mouth.
Now they're ready for their big
day, which is their exam day.
They come into the office
with all of that material.
And we very carefully
spend two to three hours
going over everything.
Then we do a
complete examination.
We do X-rays.
We do a 3D cone beam
scan of the head.
And--
>>EDWARD: What is the difference
between a 3D cone beam scan
and an X-ray, a standard X-ray?
>>GRUBE: A standard X-ray
is only two dimensional.
It's a flat picture
of something that
is actually three dimensions.
So with the new
cone beams that--
it's only 14 seconds the
X-ray goes around the head.
The image gets placed
into my computer.
And in my computer, I can
slice the patient like an MRI.
I can slice them in an AP
direction, anterior, posterior.
I can slice them
right to left side.
I can slice them diagonally.
I can slice them from the top.
I can look at them in every
which direction I want to.
And you can see
abscesses on teeth
that you could not see in
a two-dimensional picture.
You see the depth and
the width of a cavity,
not just the little radiographic
darkness that tells you, yes,
there's a cavity there.
You actually see how big the
cavity is because everything
is in three dimensions.
If the patient has an
infection in their jawbone,
we can see that in a 3D picture.
So it really has brought
radiography and dentistry
into the 21st century,
where years from now,
they're going to say, it was the
dark ages when they were just
looking at 2D.
>>EDWARD: So after that
scan, then what happens?
>>GRUBE: After that
scan, then we sit down
and we do a very thorough exam.
We do a cancer screening.
We do a periodontal screening.
We do an occlusion
screening to see, how
is the bite coming together?
Then I go over all of
their blood chemistry.
I go over their hair analysis,
give them recommendations
about supplementation.
Then we write up
a treatment plan.
Sometimes the treatment
plan has three or four
alternative treatment plans.
By then, the patient's
head is spinning.
And I like it when they
come with a spouse,
they come with other
family members.
And it's in a living room setup.
Our exam room has
very comfortable seats
plus the examination chair.
So we welcome other
people in the family
to join in and
give their opinion.
And sometimes we get lucky--
the patient can actually
make a decision that day.
Sometimes they need to
gather all this material
and take it home and digest it.
>>EDWARD: So during the
procedure, you're detoxifying.
What happens after
the procedure?
>>GRUBE: After the
procedure, then
they usually will see my
husband, who's a chiropractor.
Or they go to back to their
naturopath, their physician,
or their chiropractor.
And we together will work
out a detoxification plan
for that patient.
>>EDWARD: For the
individual patient.
>>GRUBE: Yes.
And it's different
for everybody.
>>EDWARD: How do you know-- you
talked about biocompatibility.
How would you explain
that to each individual?
What is the testing
procedure like?
>>GRUBE: Mm-hmm.
>>EDWARD: And why is it
different for each individual?
>>GRUBE: Right.
Well, when I first heard
about it, I was shocked.
I thought, well,
that's a unique idea--
find out what somebody's
allergic to before you put it
in the mouth.
What a unique idea.
This is just fantastic.
I mean, if you think about it,
if you had an allergic problem
with dairy, would you go
into a French restaurant
and tell the chef to bring
whatever's on the menu?
Bring whatever
you think is best?
You would never do that,
because in a French restaurant
you know it's going
to have dairy.
It's going to have butter,
because every French meal
starts out with those
two ingredients, right?
And yet in dentistry we
go into the dental office
and we say to the dentist, well,
give me what you think is best.
As a matter of fact, we do that
in the physician's office too.
And these poor physicians
write out prescriptions--
sometimes they don't
even know what they're
writing out prescriptions for.
I hate to say it.
I'm amazed at how
many people come out
of a doctor's office,
a medical doctor's
office, with a prescription in
their hand for an antibiotic.
And I say, oh, did
they do a culture?
Did he take a culture
of your throat
before he gave you
that prescription?
No.
Well, how does he know, then,
which antibiotic to give you?
How does the dentist know
which filling material
to put in your mouth without
doing a compatibility
test first?
Right?
>>EDWARD: So just to be
clear, what you're doing is
you're just finding out what
type of composite or what you
can replace those
fillings with--
>>GRUBE: Correct.
>>EDWARD: --that are
not going to cause
any type of negative
reaction in the patient.
>>GRUBE: And so how
do you measure that?
You measure that by looking
at the immune reactive cells
of the body.
Those are our white blood cells.
That's the army
that is constantly
looking for self or non-self.
Well, now, so here
we have a problem,
because we have to put a dental
material in your mouth that's
not you.
So your body's going to react.
But we want something that
is going to react the least.
>>EDWARD: Well, we actually
had the opportunity
to visit BioComp labs
in Colorado Springs.
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: Let's take a look.
>>GRUBE: Hi.
I'm Dr. Blanche Grube.
I'm standing in front
of the building that
houses my two laboratories
and my education company,
called Huggins Applied
Healing, DNA ConneXions,
and BioComp Laboratories.
This is where it
all happens, where
the doctors and the
patients are educated
from beginning to end and
find everything that they
need for their healing journey.
This is the first
time we've ever
allowed somebody to do filming
inside of our companies.
So I've allowed Gaia to come in
and give you all the privilege
of seeing what goes on inside.
Come on in.
So when a doctor
has been educated,
and they know how to
protect the patient
and remove all the toxic
materials from their mouth
and do it properly,
then they have
to answer to the
question of, what
do I put in the patient's mouth?
Well, that's where BioComp
Laboratories comes into play.
We're a laboratory,
also CLIA certified,
that tests the serum of a
patient with dental components.
Kendall, can you show us
what one of the samples
looks like when it comes--
ah, look at that.
You notice it's got a
little bit of an orange hue.
But it's not red.
The red blood cells would have
been at the bottom of that test
tube.
And they were disposed of.
This is the serum portion.
This is the part that has all
of the different proteins that
are part of the immune system.
We have 88 different
dental components.
All 88 wells would be filled,
placed into this machine.
When the machine is done mixing
the serum with the dental
components-- it takes
about 20 minutes--
then we pass a light
through that test tube.
If the light goes through
the test tube very easily,
meaning the amount of light
that comes in on one end
is almost the same as
the amount of light
that comes out the
other end, then
that is a material
that is relatively
safe for the patient, or what
we would call least reactive.
If the immune system does
not like a dental material,
it will clump around it.
It will cause the test tube
to turn opaque, or white.
And less light goes through it.
That's called a highly
reactive material.
So you don't want
to put something
in your mouth that is going to
cause your immune system to be
constantly fighting against
it, to be constantly trying
to figure out, how do
we get rid of this?
You always want to
put a dental material
in your mouth that
is least reactive,
that your immune
system recognizes.
It's not self, but it also
doesn't freak out and say,
we've got to get rid of this.
Most people are sick
because they have materials
in their mouth that
their immune system
has been trying to get rid
of for 20, 30, 40 years,
and the immune
system is exhausted.
So now the computer has
received all the information
it knows about how much light
passed through the test tube
and generated the
compatibility report.
This report has
literally thousands
of dental materials in it.
And it tells the patient
what they're OK with
and what they're not OK with.
And so it's very easy for a
dentist to take a look at this.
And now the patient
is going to have
something put in their
mouth that they're
very compatible with.
Now that you know what
you know, my wish for you
is that before you have
any dentistry done,
you have a biocompatibility
test done first
and have safe
dentistry completed.
Thank you.
>>EDWARD: Thank you
so much for allowing
our cameras behind the scenes.
>>GRUBE: You're welcome.
>>EDWARD: I think that was the
only time you've ever allowed
cameras in your lab, correct?
>>GRUBE: That is correct.
We have never allowed
somebody to actually come
into our laboratory and
see what's going on.
But we decided to
do it this time
because I'm at the
point in my life
where I'm tired of holding back.
I'm going to let the world
know there's a better way
to do dentistry.
And this is the better way.
>>EDWARD: And you're only one
of two of these biocompatibility
labs--
>>GRUBE: That is true.
>>EDWARD: --in the
world, or in the country?
>>GRUBE: In the country.
To be honest with
you, I'm not sure
if there are any other labs
in other countries that do it.
I don't think so, because we
receive tests from dentists
in other countries.
>>EDWARD: So do most
people not even know
what goes in their fillings?
>>GRUBE: Most people have no
clue what the dentist has just
put in their mouth.
>>EDWARD: And most
people don't even ask.
>>GRUBE: And most
>>EDWARD: How should
people go about finding
the right dentist?
>>GRUBE: Goggle it, or Google--
as Dr. Hal Huggins would
say, goggle it, or Google it.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah.
Put in-- Google "biological
dentists in my area."
>>EDWARD: That's
one of the things
that I always say as well-- just
ask questions and research it.
>>GRUBE: Mm-hmm.
Right.
>>EDWARD: I think people are
just not doing enough research
out there.
I mean, it's easy
for us to say, when
we want to get something
done, we do the research,
or something's going on with
us that's not comfortable--
>>GRUBE: Right.
Right.
>>EDWARD: --we do the research
and we find solutions.
But most people out there
just go to their local dentist
or go to their local doctor.
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: What advice would you
give somebody that's suffering
or that has mercury
amalgams in their mouth?
A message that you would like
to tell them to give them
hope, to give them faith?
>>GRUBE: I would say,
first, go to your physician
and see what the physician
can-- first do the testing
to see if it's mercury issue.
And then, second, the
physician can give you
some recommendations to help
you detox as you're going along.
>>EDWARD: And you mentioned
earlier the cost factor.
How big of an issue is
that for most individuals?
I mean, they see this,
they go to-- they
find a biological dentist.
It's so expensive.
You already said,
what can you do
if you don't have the money--
>>GRUBE: Right.
>>EDWARD: --at that time?
Save the money.
>>GRUBE: Save the money.
>>EDWARD: I mean,
this is your health.
Your health is priceless.
>>GRUBE: Yeah.
It's all about
priorities, isn't it?
It's all about priorities.
We won't hesitate
to buy a new iPhone.
We don't hesitate to buy a
new computer every two years.
Some of us have two, three,
four TVs in the house.
It's all about priorities.
For me, my priority
is my health,
because if I don't have
that I have nothing.
>>EDWARD: If you don't have
your health, you have nothing.
>>GRUBE: You don't have-- right.
>>EDWARD: Thank you so much
for your message and all
the information--
>>GRUBE: Thank you.
>>EDWARD: --that
you've shared today.
>>GRUBE: Thank you
very much, Dr. Ed.
>>EDWARD: I'm Dr. Edward Group.
Thank you for joining
us on "Healing Matrix."
[OUTRO MUSIC]